Since the beginning of the war, Israelis have been asking themselves, how did this happen? One easy answer to that question is that Hamas doesn’t accept our existence here, that it’s barbaric, that it wants to kill us. But the real question for Israelis, when they say, how did this happen is, how did our government let this happen? And the answer to that question is that the government was complacent, overconfident, committed to misconceptions, and has failed. And Prime Minister Netanyahu is personally responsible for that, and he has to go.


My name is Gershom Gorenberg. I am a historian and journalist. And I live in Jerusalem, Israel. Netanyahu has been in office for 13 out of the last 14 years. The priorities of this government are really striking because the central priority of the government has been what it calls judicial reform. That’s a euphemism.

Archived Recording 1
Israeli lawmakers approving a key part of a divisive judicial overhaul plan despite mass protests. Part of the plan, pushed by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, removes the court system’s ability to strike down, quote, “unreasonable decisions” by the government.

Gershom Gorenberg
And that has really been its central priority, and in turn, set off a huge wave of protests in the country.

Archived Recording 2
We protest today for the liberty and the democracy of Israel.

Gershom Gorenberg
The other two things that have really marked this government has been large transfers of funds to the ultra-orthodox sector and support of the West Bank Settlement Project. From what the public can see, defense, national security have taken a second seat to those other priorities.

But what we have to understand is that Netanyahu’s blindness to the danger from Hamas and Gaza has a longer history, and that’s rooted in a strategic choice that Netanyahu has made since he returned to power and has followed since then. Dating back to 2007, the extreme Islamic Hamas organization seized control of the Gaza Strip, pushing aside the autonomous Palestinian Authority.

Archived Recording 3
With gunfire, a takeover of Gaza by Hamas may be near. The latest sign, Hamas takes over this important security installation of the rival Fatah movement.

Gershom Gorenberg
So the situation that resulted from that is that Hamas rules the Gaza Strip, the small enclave along the Mediterranean Coast at the south end of Israel. And the Palestinian Authority rules the autonomous areas in the West Bank. The Palestinian Authority has been a proponent in the past of a two-state outcome, a two-state agreement between Israel and the Palestinians.

Netanyahu’s policy, over the years, has been with zigs and zags publicly, but essentially opposed to the creation of a Palestinian state. And he has treated this split between Hamas in Gaza and the Palestinian Authority government in the West Bank as a political advantage for Israel, as something that makes it more difficult to reach a two-state outcome. And his policy has been to allow this split to continue.

The government, very clearly, was focused on the West Bank, on protection of settlements in the West Bank, and on the northern border with Lebanon and Hezbollah, and was complacent regarding the threat from Gaza. And the military misreading of the situation is derived from the political misreading, stemming from an attitude that with the split with Hamas in Gaza and with the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, that Israel could indefinitely continue to manage the conflict safely, rather than seeking any kind of diplomatic resolution of the conflict with the Palestinians.

All of that, obviously, has literally gone up in flames on and after October 7. It is a subject of pointed public controversy within Israel that Netanyahu has not accepted any responsibility for a catastrophic failure in defense of the country.

Netanyahu does not have the trust and confidence of the country and has not shown himself capable of dealing with the situation. He appears to have been too concerned with his own affairs and with his bid to solidify his power and not sufficiently concerned with the good of the country.

The expression in Hebrew that people often use is, he’s worried about the King and not the Kingdom, that is to say about the leader and not about the state. And I think that there are circumstances which demand the change of a leader during wartime. Britain was much better off trading in Chamberlain for Churchill, even though it was the middle of a war.

So the first expectation I would have of Netanyahu is to resign and go home. For years, I felt that the attitude of the government toward the conflict could be compared to the attitude of the man who jumped out of a 100-story building. And when he passed the 20th story, somebody yelled out, how’s it going? And he said, so far, great. We’ve passed that point, and it’s not going great. And that policy has failed, and we need a completely new direction. And Netanyahu is not the man to lead us in that new direction.